University of Lapland
Faculty of Education
KTYL0201 Finnish System of Education

Comparison of the Finnish education system with the Swiss (Zurich) education system

What can Switzerland learn from the Finnish education system and what can Finland learn from the Swiss (Zurich) system?

Corinne Trottmann
Student Nr.:0368438
Supervisor: E. Alssen
Table of Contents
1.	Introduction	3
2.	Structure of the school systems	3
3.	Comparison between the school systems of Finland and Zurich	4
3.1.	Preschool	6
3.2.	Primary School	6
3.3.	Secondary school level	7
3.3.1.	Lower secondary education	7
3.3.2.	Gymnasium	8
4.	Conclusion	8
5.	Literatur	11

 
1.	Introduction
In this paper, I will compare the Finnish school system with to the Swiss school system. As a future teacher, I am very interested in other school systems from other countries. In my opinion, every teacher should be open minded and should be willing to learn more about other school systems and compare them. So the teachers can figure out the best way for to teaching their classes. The comparison will always be a gain, even if a teacherA teacher will always gain something by a comparison, even if he/she realises that his/her own system is the best for the class. 
Especially the comparison with to the Finnish school system is very interesting for foreigners very interesting. I think everybody has the opinion that the school system in Finland has to be extraordinary good, because Finland is always one of the top countries on the PISA-lists. So the expectations about on the Finnish school system are on a very high level. 
So the question for me as a Swiss teacher is: what can Switzerland learn from the Finnish school system?
In the first part of this paper, I will explain some general issues about the school structures in Finland and Switzerland. In the next part, I will compare the general structures of school. I will explain the systems of the whole compulsory school. To understand the systems, I think it is necessary to have an overview of the systems, so I don’t focus on a single class level. In this first part, I will include my experience, which I made in Finnish and Swiss schools, as well. In a third part, I will point out what the countries could learn from each other and what I, personally, have learned.

2.	Structure of the school systems
In Finland the Parliament determines the general principles of the education policy. The National Board of Education is responsible for the national curricula and for the development of education affairs. So the whole country has the same education system and there are no differences between the regions (Siurua, 2002). 
On the other hand, the school structure in Switzerland is decentralised. Every Canton has the responsibility to decide by his own about the structure of the school system. There is no national ministerium of education, and the state itselfs gives just a few general conditions. Thus, every Canton has his own structure (Vernunft Schweriz [VS], 2012). It would go beyond the frame of this work, if I include all the several Swiss systems in this essay as well. Thus, in my paper I will focus only on the school system of the Canton Zurich, because I went to school in Zurich, and I work in my teacher training with the curriculum of Zurich. So I know it best. 
I think this decentralisation of the school systems in Switzerland is not good for the pupils, families and the country itselfs. First of all, if a family wants to move in an other Canton, it will be difficult for a child to intergrate in the new school system. Secondly, a lot of Swiss people wants to have the same system in every Canton. Three years ago, there was a plebiscite in Switzerland about the unification of the school systems in Switzerland. The initiative was called “harmoS”. The main aims of this initivative were to harmonise the main objectives of the educational levels, their transitions und to set a fixed duration for the compulsory school. The duration would be nine years: two years kindergarten, six years primary school and three years lower secondary school (EDK, 2010a). If we have a look at the “harmoS” vote grafic, we can see that a lot of Cantons voted pro “harmoS” and are joining now this structures:
 
Figure 1: HarmoS process of accession. Green: acceded. Red: not acceded. White: access still open. (EDK, 2010b).
So I think that in a few years there will be as well a uniform school system in the whole country like in Finland. It would make the school organisation easier and the degrees would be uniform.
3.	Comparison between the school systems of Finland and Zurich
In the following part, I will comapare the compulsory school systems of Finland and Zurich (Switzerland).
In a first step I will compare the graphics of these two school systems. The first impression I got, as I looked at these graphics, was that they are quite similar, but in Finland the system appears more uniform. On the other hand in Zurich, the school system is divided in several little smaller parts. So my comparison follows the structure of Zurich that so I don’t miss a part. I will start with the preschool and end up with the secondaryschool level. In the finnish school system these parts are called “children’s day care”, “Pre-school education” and “Basdic education”. In the Zurich school system these parts are called “Kindergarten”, “Primarstufe”, “Sekundarstufe” und “Gymnasium”.
 
Figure 2: Finnish school system (Siurua, 2002).

 
Figure 3: Swiss school system (Schul- und Sportdepartement der Stadt Zürich, 2012c).

3.1.	Preschool
In Finland is exists a whole system for children at the age of 0-6. It is called “Early Childhood Education and Care”. It even starts at birth. The parents can decide if they want to care for the child at home,or have the child cared for in private day care or in a municipal day car (Ministry of social affairs and health, 2004). In Switzerland, there is just the voluntary opportunity called Spielgruppe for children at the age of four. It takes about two mornings per week and the main aim is that the children can play with other children and make experiences in interaction with others. During the first years, the parents in Switzerland have to pay everything by their own. There is no special financial support for education and the state is not involved at all during the first years (VS, 2012). These first years do not belong to the preschool, but I think there it are is important to know. The state of Finland cares very early about the children. I think this fact shows that education has an important status in Finland. 
In Finland at the age of six, children can go to Pre-school for one year, if the parents want them to go. Although Pre-school is voluntary, about 90 % of the children visit the kindergarten. The basic aim of the preschool is to guarantee equal opportunities for children to learn and starting school. In Zurich the preschool system is called Kindergarten and takes 2 years. The Kindergarten belongs to the compulsory school and has his own curriculum. The main focuses are - like in Finland - to support children in exploring the environment, provide equal opportunities and promote the children’s overall well-being (Schul- und Sportdepartement der Stadt Zürich, 2012). 
Like in Switzerland, in Finland the Preschool is mostly not in the same building as the primary school. Unfortunately, I haven’t visited a preschool in Finland so far. But as I heard, the teachers try to go out as often as possible into the nature. In Switzerland they go out probably one day per week. It depends how far away the forest is. I think in Finland it is important to familiarize the children with the nature, because in Finland there is a lot of it. In Switzerland, a lot of Kindergartens are in the city and they have to take a bus to go into to the forest. I wish that if it is possible the teachers would go often out into the nature often. It should become normal to go into to the forest. Additionally, in Zurich there is the problem, that not all children have rain clothes or other clothes for going into to the forest. And a teacher cannot force the parents to buy some. I guess in Finland it is normal to have forest clothes.
In Finland, the adult-child ratio in Kindergarten is one to thirteen, while in Zurich the ratio is about one to twenty-three. The adult-child ratio in Finland seems luxury and provides a lot of opportunities of teaching. For becoming a preschool teacher, it you needs a Bachelor Degree in both countries (Ministry of social affairs and health, 2004).

3.2.	Primary School
In Zurich are 6 years of primary school, like in Finland (VS, 2012). In Zurich, the school makes a difference between lower primary education and middle primary education. The only consequence is that the classes mix up and change the teacher after the third year of graduate (VS, 2012). In Finland a similar act happens after the second year, but they do no mention that in their structure graphic.
In Finland and in Zurich, there is just one main teacher for the class. I think this is important for children in this early age, so they have one main person to talk with and who is responsibleto take responsibility for them. In Zurich and in Finland the school is free of charge. Additionally, in Finland lunch and health care is free of charge as well (Finnish National Board of Education, 2008). I think that is a really good thing, but I will explicate this topic later in my “conclusion”. In Switzerland the children have classes during the morning and they go home for lunch. At some days they have to come back in the afternoon for more lessons. Because, in Finland, the lunch is included between the lessons, the pupils stay at school, and have classes for example until two o’clock.
There is general opinion that the education in Finland is more development-oriented with a non-selective basic (Guardian, 2012). As I experienced during my observations, pupils have to write tests as well, and they compare their results like the pupils in Zurich. I have the impression that it is a vision to be not result-driven without any competition. A teacher cannot completely avoid competition  at all between the pupils. 
Teachers in Finland told me they focus very on the goal to support every child individually and work interactive as in a partnership. I experienced that the thoughts of “individually” and “being stand-alone” are quite strong in Finland. Nevertheless, I observed that they use a lot of front teaching, and I guess the teachers focus on each individual more in the background. I have the impression this these thoughts of supporting individually are quite new in Switzerland, but it they has have becoame more important. In Zurich, teachers try to avoid front teaching and start to focus on individual teaching with workshops, studios or individual learning timetables. There is a will to teach individually, while in Finland it seems to be common, but in fact they don’t teach individually. They support individually.
Additionally, in Zurich it becomes important that the pupils do not have to sit the whole day at their desk. Teachers try to provide allow the pupils in to moveing during the lessons. They try to make active lessons because there are several reasons why children learn better if they can move. On the other hand, in Finland I have never heard a teacher talk about this issue.

3.3.	Secondary school level
3.3.1.	Lower secondary education
In Zurich, lower secondary education lasts three years, like in Finland. In Zurich, the lower secondary school is divided in three levels (A, B and C). The pupils with good marks reach level A. Usually in a lower secondary school there is one A-class, one B-class and one C-class on each school level. Since few years, it is also possible to complete some subject in a higher or lower level as in the main level. There is one main teacher in the lower secondary school (Schul- und Sportdepartement der Stadt Zürich, 2012b). In Finland there is one teacher for each subject. They are specialised (Siurua, 2002). In my opinion, it is better if the teachers are specialised. So the teachers have really a really founded knowledge in their subject and whichthis is important on this school level.
In Finland 99.7% of the pupils complete the compulsory school (Unesco, 2000). For me this is a really high rate. I do not now the number of Swiss students, who complete the compulsory school, but I knew some of them.
3.3.2.	Gymnasium
Additionally, in Switzerland there is the possibility to visit a Gymnasium after finishing the primary school. As I know, Gymnasiums have different main topics, for example maths, Latin, economy and so on. The Gymnasium takes 6 years. There is as well the possibility to visit the Gymnasium after the lower secondary school. Then the gymnasium takes 4 years.

Comparing the secondary school systems of Finland and Zurich, I would prefer the Finnish system. I think one weak point in the Swiss system is that if a pupil studies in a B level, then he is a B-student. That means he is in every subject a B-student, even if he is very good in language. On the other hand you probably have to leave the Gymnasium, just because you are not good enough in maths and you can’t compensate with other subject’s marks. This system cannot cope with the individuality of each student. I have not been in a lower secondary school in Finland, but I imagine that they have to work on a very individual level with the pupils. I assume it is a lot of work for the teachers, but there are subject teachers, that makes it easier. In my imagination it would be perfect if all pupils can could visit the same class but work individually on their level.
4.	Conclusion
Comparing the school-system-structures of Zurich and of Finland, there are mainly similar. But behind the structures, I experienced differences in teachinger, learning, and education, which I will explain in this part as well. I will point out the most important differences and make my conclusion what the countries could learn from each other. 

The most noteworthy difference is the “ulterior motive” behind the principle of education. I experienced that Finland’s education system is predicated on the idea of individuality on the basis of equality. I will explain the meaning of this sentence. During my time here in Rovaniemi, Finland, I often experienced often that Fins try to provide equality. They avoid every kind of hierarchy. For example in Zurich, Switzerland, everybody knows who “earns” respect and has the better job. A Finnish friend of mine told me in Finland it is important that you have a job and no matter what kind of. Finns don’t compare their salary and work status. Of course this equality exists at school as well. For example, children with special needs are tried to be integrated in an ordinary class and no child would be left behind (Niveri, 2008). I know in teachers Zurich teacher try the same, but in Finland the will to integrate is stronger in the minds of the teachers. Another example of this equality is the fact that students call their teacher and eve professors with the first name. In Zurich this would be impossible. Every teacher has to be called with the last name. In Zurich there are even two different translations of “you”: “du” is informal and “Sie” is formal. A pupil has to say “Sie” to a teacher. I have the impression, calling the first name and not saying “Sie” builds up another different kind of relationship between the pupils and the teacher. They are more like a team working on the same issue. Saying the last name shows a lot of respect and it makes it a bit difficult, especially for the pupils, to work together in a team with their teachers.
This equality means not that all are equal. On the contrary, Finns set value on individuality. I experienced at school that the teachers really try to focus on every child, even if it is after the lesson. For example the teacher thought what each child needs for the upcoming exam. 
In Zurich the thought of individuality exists as well, but I haven’t experienced it so far that as strong like as in Finland. Of course, it always depends on the teacher. 
I like this idea of individuality on the basis of equality. The focus is on each, but nobody is superior. I think in Zurich this idea could not survive in the society, because our society is based on hierarchy. And the school reflects the society. There has to be a change in all Swiss minds.

Another remarkable difference is the status of a teacher in the society. In Finland, teachers and their opinions are much respected. On the other hand, in Zurich the work of a teacher seems to be not so important. I have the impression the society thinks that everybody could teach, because everybody has been at to school. Even at my university the professor told us that a degree as teacher is less worth than a for example a degree as a lawyer, a doctor or a mathematician. I think by repeating this issue everywhere, it will get more fixed in the heads of the people. Another thing that provides this thought is that, in my opinion, the teacher training in Zurich is too easy going. When I compare my semester here in Finland with a semester in Zurich, I have to say that I have to work in Finland three times more in Finland for University than in Zurich. In Finland the teacher training is harder and a teacher needs even a Master Degree for teaching at primary school. Additionally, in Finland it is really hard to get a place at university. In Switzerland a lot of students have the opinion, if they fail in another study-subject, they can still become a teacher. I think the fact that the teacher training is easy (compared with other study-subjects), influences the respect for a teachers as well. I would appreciate, when the teacher training becomes more intensive. Therefore, the students would be better prepared for working as teacher. I suggest that could increase the respect for the job as teacher. 

As I experienced, Finns focus very strongalot on the idea of no child will is leftleave behind. Thus, they have a well organised special needs education, what that supports the teachers. As well during the normal teacher training they try to support teachers in their gaining of knowledge about special needs. So the teacher is and will be the first instance for recognising that a child needs special support. And the Finnish teacher will be the first who provides this special support. In Zurich, if a teacher recognisesd that a child needs special support, the teacher has to ask for support by a special teacher. Mostly the special teacher suggests what to do nexttells what is to do. In my opinion this fact is as well connected with the teacher training in each country. I think it is better if the teacher knows as well what to do as a first step. Special teachers should be something common in Swiss classrooms as well. Nowadays, I experienced a lot, that the special teacher is in a class for one child to support just one child und not to assist the teacher because a child needs special support. 

Pupils in Finland can have meals and health care free of charge. I think that is a way for Finns to provide their equality as well. In my opinion a free meal is good for the children. So the teachers can be sure that the children have eaten enough and can continue with the lessons. Additionally, children don’t have to go home over lunchtime. Thus, they can go home earlier in the afternoon. Finns told me that they have to pay a lot of taxes, so this service can be provided. I like the timetables of Finnish schools and I know this is just possible because the lunch is included. But my personal opinion is that every family should care about their own food and as a child Ii liked it to go home and eat at home with my family. I suggest providing a free healthy snacks or breakfast. In Switzerland are a lot of pupils, who do not eat anything before leaving for school. I would say breakfast is more important than lunch.

When I compare the teaching methods of Zurich’s and Finnish teachers, I would say that Finnish teacher could learn some teaching forms from Zurich’s teacher. Of course, I have not observed a lot of teachers in Finland, but I can talk about what I observed. All I saw is front-teaching and group works. In Zurich we know several teaching forms to provide individual learning like workshops, studios or individual learning timetables. 

What Zurich can learn from Finland:
-	In Zurich, the Job as a teacher should be more respected.
-	The teacher training should be more intensive, so students are better prepared for workingwork.
-	Zurich schools should amplify the special needs education system, so no child will be left behind.
-	The thought of equality should be more provided. For example in not separating children in the secondary school. Children’s individual abilities are not a reason for splitting. 
-	Probably Zurich could think about free food at schools.

What Finland can learn from Zurich:
-	Teacher should use more varied teaching methods.




5.	Literatur
Siurua, S. (2002). Basic Education in Finland and the United States: Overwiev and Personal Experiences. Institutions Survey Paper, University of Tampere, Finland. http://www.uta.fi/FAST/US2/PAPS/ss-edfus.html  (11.12.2012)
Guardian (ed.) (2012). How Finnish schools shine. Guardian News. United Kingdom. http://www.guardian.co.uk/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2012/apr/09/finish-school-system (11.12.2012)

Unesco (ed.) (2000). Assessment: Country Reports. Finland. 
http://www.unesco.org/education/wef/countryreports/finland/rapport_2.html (11.12.2012)
Vernunft Schweiz (VS) (ed.) (2012).  Aktuelles - Das schweizerische Bildungssystem. Schweiz.
http://www.vimentis.ch/content/docs/Bildungsystem_CH_PISA.pdf (11.10.2012)
Ministry of social affairs and health (ed.) (2004). Early Childhood Education and Care in Finland. Helinki, Finland.
Schul- und Sportdepartement der Stadt Zürich (ed.) (2012a). Ihr Kind kommt in den Kindergarten. Zürich, Schweiz.
Schul- und Sportdepartement der Stadt Zürich (ed.) (2012b). Sekundarschule. Zürich, Schweiz.
Schul- und Sportdepartement der Stadt Zürich (ed.) (2012c). Grafik: Die Schulstufen im Kanton Zürich. Zürich, Schweiz.
EDK (ed.) (2010a). HarmoS – Harmonisierung der obligatorischen Schule. Bern, Schweiz
EDK (ed.) (2010b). Beitrittsverfahren HarmoS-Konkordat. Bern, Schweiz
Finnish National Board of Education (ed.) (2008). School meals in Finland. Investment in learning. Helsinki, Finland
Niveri, L. (2008). Finnische Schulen – Jedes einzelne Kind zählt. Deutschland.
http://www.spiegel.de/schulspiegel/ausland/finnische-schulen-jedes-einzelne-kind-zaehlt-a-549547.html (14.10.2012)

