„Kindergarten“ or „Ggrundstufe“? It doesn´t matter
In this paper I will talk write about the discussion in Switzerland on the benefits of the “Ggrundstufe”. Since nine years, several schools in certain cantons in Switzerland try out the system of the “Ggrundstufe” instead of the kindergarten. The question main point of about this discussion is: What is the best way to lead children into our school system? Even teachers are not atdon’t have the same opinion about on this question and this project. I was teachingteached a in a Ggrundstufe-class for three weeks and I am really convinced about the system. FinallyAlso, an academic evaluation of this project was published this year. Our local newspaper (2010) – called TagesAnzeiger – wrote an article about the evaluation report. In a first step I will explain the system of the grundstufe . In a second step I will focus on the article from in the Tages Anzeiger. The newspaper gives a summary of the evaluation report. I will focus on, how the newspaper mentions the results. In a third step I will explain how it goes on with the system of the grundstufe in the future.

In Switzerland, every canton has the autonomy to decide how the school system looks like. The project grundstufe started at 2003 in just a few cantons. The originally goal of the grundstufe is to make the transition to school smoother. The grundstufe goes on three years and includes the ordinary kindergarten and the first class as well. The main focus for a teacher during the three years is to support children individually. The children have three years to learn writing, reading, and the other purpose needs of a first class student. So if a six years old girl wants to learn to read, she can. In Switzerland, a teacher in an ordinary kindergarten is not allowed to teach reading or writing. The grundstufe follows the idea that not all children do not want to learn reading at the same time. Every child should have the possibility to learn what he/she is interested in at the time he/she is interested in. In my class a normal day started with singing and welcoming everybody. After this introduction there was a new input or task for every child. The goal for mea as teacher was to create an open task so every child can do it on his/her level. After the break some children goet a new individual task for the following 15 minutes. After finishing the task everybody was able to play or do whatever they wanted to do. For me it was nice to see how much time the children got for playing. On the other hand there was and obviously difference between the skills of the children, but everybody was certainly on the same level as like other children in an ordinary school.

The Tages-Anzeiger says that it doesn´t matter, if a child goes to the kindergarten or to the grundstufe. After finishing the second class in an ordinary school, the children would be on the same level. But the evaluation report says as well that after the first two years of grundstufe or kindergarten, the children from the grundstufe are further ahead in their learning process. I guess the main reason for this chastening  result is that after the grundstufe the children are in the same class like as the children from the kindergarten. Of course are they are on the same level after a year. A continuation after the grundstufe is missed. Another point Tages-Anzeiger mention is that the system of grundstufe is more expensive than kindergarten. In the grundstufe are there are always two teachers team-teaching. But I think, Switzerland should be one of the last countries who worriesto worry about the costs for of school. As I mentioned before, in the grundstufe the children have a lot of time to play. I saw how happy they are, compared with the children sitting quietly on their desk. In my opinion the newspaper Tages-Anzeiger is contra against the grundstufe. The newspaper mentions more contra point out of the evaluation paper than positives. In fact ithe doesn’t ask questions about the results in the evaluation report. He just acceptsAll the results are just accepted. 

Now the project time will end. In November there will be the voting pro for or contra against the grundstufe. In my opinion, it is wrong to demand that every kindergarten is going to change to a grundstufe. That is not possible. We have too lessdon’t have enough teachers and every kindergarten-teacher has to look for a new job or for a further education as a grundstufe-teacher. The best way is to give pass the decision to the village so every village can decide individually. Because they know the best if it is possible and good for the pupils. But it would be a pity, if the grundstufe doesn’t continue. 

In my opinion the grundstufe is a good way to lead children to the school system. The thought behind the project – that every child has enough time for individual learning and exploration of the environment – should be supported by every teacher.

