Treatment of the article: Motor Performance and rhythmic perception of children with intellectual and developmental disability and developmental coordination disorder by Kartasidou L., Varsamis P. and Sampsonidou A. (2012).


In this paper I will talk about the article Motor Performance and rhythmic perception of children with intellectual and developmental disability and developmental coordination disorder by Kartasidou L., Varsamis P. and Sampsonidou A. (2012). This article describes a study in which the researchers wanted to find out if there is any correlation between music performance and motor skills. The relationship between physical movement and music is often mentioned in literature (e.g. Sutton, 1984; Micheals, 2001). This study focuses especially on children with special needs. In the area of education and pedagogy, the issue about special needs education has become more and more important. Teachers are trying to integrate children with special needs in their lessons and researches are trying to find out how one can support these children. An overall understanding is growing. The first part of this paper describes how the researchers proceeded during the study. The second part gives the results of the study and discusses them. In the last part, I point out how these results could affect my teaching.

The study focuses especially on children with development disability and coordination disorder. Two of the participants have been diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder. Thus, 19 children participated in this study; 15 boys and 4 girls at the age between 5 and 12 years. To know how well developed their motor skills are, the researchers use the Lincoln-Oseretzky Scale (LOS-KF-18) (Eggert, 1974). LOS-KF-18 is a test for non-disabled children and for children with disabilities as well and is mainly used for clinical use. It bases on 18 tasks: touching nose, tap the same rhythm with finger and foot, walking straight backwards, rope-skipping, standing on one leg, drawing circle in the air, catching a ball, sorting matches, jumping and touching heels, fine motor coordination of thumb and index finger, collect matches with both hands at the same time, tracing a prefigured line, balancing on toes with closed eyes, cutting a circle with a scissor, opening and closing hands while turning them, tapping with feet while circling fingers, stand on one leg with closed eyes, high-jumping with clapping three times (Macha, T., 2010).
This tasks of the LOS-KF-18 test “asses balance, bilateral coordination, visual-motor control, upper-limb coordination and upper-limb dexterity”. (Kartasidou L., Varsamis P. and Sampsonidou A., 2012, p. 5f.) In my opinion, these tasks are very interesting and useful. It is possible to integrate them as well in schools.
To find a connection between motor skills and music performance, the children have to do a music rhythmic test as well. This second test is based on four different categories: tactile perception, auditory perception, audio-visual perception, and audio-visual-tactile perception. The first one is tactile perception. In this case a person tapes the rhythm on a child’s shoulder and the child has to reproduce the rhythm with a drumstick. The second category is auditory perception. The child has just to listen to the rhythm and reproduce the same thereafter. In the next step the focus is on audio-visual perception. Thus, a drummer sits right in front of the child and tapes the rhythm. The child has so to repeat the rhythm. The last category is the audio-visual-tactile perception. In this case, a person tapes the rhythm on the child’s knee and speaks the rhythm out. The child has to repeat it. 
After these two tests, the researchers tried to find correlations between motor skills and musical performance. The correlations are written in this table:


This table shows that there are some correlations between motor skills and music performance. As shown above in the table, there is a very high correlation between the tactile item and the task about touching the nose with index fingers (0.67). Additionally, the researchers found strong connections between the auditory and audio-visual items, and the jumping tasks. Transferring pennies and matches has a very strong connection to the tactile perception and to the audio-visual-tactile perception too. For me, these results are very interesting because I did not expect these correlations. In my opinion, it is especially fascinating, is that the auditory item probably has a connection to the balance skills. This I did not expect at all and I could not come up with an explanation at the first moment.
Thus, the researchers give some possible explanations for some of the results. There is a strong correlation between balance skill and auditory ability. A possible reason is that auditory and audio-visual items have a strong connection with the inner ear, and “the inner ear is responsible for the gravity, head movement and balance” (Ayres, 2008; in Kartasidou L., Varsamis P. and Sampsonidou A., 2012, p. 11) – in other words for balance skill. So skill in balancing is connected to audio perceptions because of the relation to the inner ear. I knew this connection before, but I did not know that the influence is so wide. Additionally, I am wondering how the inner ear is correlated to auditory ability and balance skill. Auditory ability and balance skill is trainable – does the inner ear change while improving these skills?
Dunn (1999; in Kartasidou L., Varsamis P. and Sampsonidou A., 2012, p. 12) gives a possible explanation why there is a correlation between motor-visual coordination and items on the tactile sense. He says that “the tactile system is responsible for visual perception and motor planning” (Dunn, 1999; in Kartasidou L., Varsamis P. and Sampsonidou A., 2012, p. 12). In fact, I have never heard a similar statement and I do not understand how the tactile system is correlated to motor planning. Nevertheless, I knew the correlation between the visual perception and the tactile system. In fact, what we see is based on our tactile perception as well. One of my simple and obvious explanations for some results is that some of the coordination tasks are based on visual perception. For instance, cutting out a circle with a scissor requires a well-developed visual perception. 
Half of the 18 LOS-KF-18 tasks are correlated with the four kinds of perceptions. Conclusively, there is somehow a correlation between music performance (rhythm) and motor skills. In other words, “rhythm is the most prominent component of music linked with the individual’s motor behaviour” (e.g., Styns, van Noorden, Moelants, & Leman, 2007; in Kartasidou L., Varsamis P. and Sampsonidou A., 2012, p. 12).
For me the most important question is, how could this result affect me and my teaching? In my opinion, motor skills are very important since we need them in many areas during our whole life. I think it could be possible that through these kinds of perception, pupils could gain another access to improve motor skills. Therefore, I will integrate these results in my teaching. The question is now: how? First of all, I would claim that this result is also true for non-disabled children. I would not expect different results if the tests were repeated with non-disabled children. It would be interesting for me to have a look at these results as well. That means for me to make no difference between disabled and non-disabled children. Thus, I draw the conclusion that I will integrate more rhythmic exercises in my lessons for all pupils. The research showed that perception and rhythmic is somehow connected. Thus, for improving perception, pupils have to train their rhythmic skills. These exercises could be similar to the exercises of the rhythmic test which were used in this research. I think they could be easily integrated in my teaching, especially in music lessons. Additional, I will use all four categories in rhythmic consciously (tactile, auditory, audio-visual and audio-visual-tactile). Furthermore, I suggest not using these four categories just for music lessons. For improving rhythmic skills, pupils have to train their perception. Thus, a teacher can also integrate these categories in other parts during other lessons. For example, the teacher can give instructions verbal or written or just demonstrate how one should do an exercise. If he/she varies in his/her way of giving instructions, pupils can improve their perception skills as well. 
On the other hand, I think that I have to take the results carefully. The results are not proved at all. Nevertheless, I would say that everybody has to try out rhythmic exercises by his/her own and then he/she can decide if they are useful or not. In Switzerland we have an adage: If anything doesn’t help, it doesn’t harm. 
All in all, this study points out for me that we have to open our way of teaching to different kinds of teaching methods. Pupils can benefit.

This study showed me that there are some possible correlations between motor skills and music performance. These correlations were found in this study with children with disability. The study gave as well logical and possible reasons for these correlations. The results lead me to open my way of teaching and include more rhythmic and motor coordination tasks. Nevertheless, I will take the results carefully.







Eggert, D. (1974).  Lincoln-Oseretzky-Skala. LOS KF 18. Kurzform zur Messung des motorischen Entwicklungsstandes von normalen und behinderten Kindern im Alter von 5 bis 13 Jahren. Weinheim. Beltz Test Gesellschaft.
Kartasidou L., Varsamis P. and Sampsonidou A. (2012). Motor Performance and rhythmic perception of children with intellectual and developmental disability and developmental coordination disorder, International Journal of special Education, VOL 27, No: 1
Macha, T. (2010). Lincoln-Oseretzky-Skalen Kurzform. Enwicklungsdiagnostik.de, Germany. http://entwicklungsdiagnostik.de/los_kf_18.html (14.11.2012)


